---
layout: post
title: Ch-Ch-Ch-Changes
date:  2009-09-21
---

A couple months ago, I resigned my position at Hashrocket. This was not an easy
decision for me. Working with the rocketeers has been a very fulfilling and
edifying experience. The people at Hashrocket are passionate about what they do
and extremely competent. I was given challenging and rewarding
responsibilities. Hashrocket was a great job and I would recommend it to
anyone. Why, then, did I chose to leave?

<!--more-->

In the end, it came down to a need for personal growth. At Hashrocket, I have
had the opportunity to work with interesting clients on interesting projects,
to lead a number of talented development teams and to consult on Rails
development and Agile methodologies to large businesses. Thanks to Hashrocket,
I have expanded my core competencies and matured as a developer. Certainly I
could have stayed with Hashrocket and continued this process. There was more to
do and more to learn. In the end, though, I felt that it was time to for me to
take on a new set of challenges. My friend and former boss, Obie Fernandez, has
been wonderfully supportive of me in this and I owe him a great debt of
gratitude. I am happy to say that my departure from Hashrocket has been
entirely amicable. They are a great bunch, one and all, and I am fortunate to
have worked with them.

As a consultant for the past eight years, both freelance and with Hashrocket, I
have worked with many clients. This work has been more or less successful, my
clients have been more or less happy, and the work has been more or less
satisfying, but there is a common factor in its transient nature. I work on a
project for weeks or months, provide as much value as my abilities allow, and
then move on to another project once my role is complete. Consultants rarely
experience the satisfaction and sense of accomplishment of a job well done, the
rewards of the successful completion of a long and often arduous project life
cycle.

So, to make a long story short, I wanted to find a project that I could call
home. I wanted to feel a sense of ownership in the project and its outcome. I
also wanted to learn new skills and develop new competencies. The problem is
that I didn't yet know where home was, so I decided to start by taking some
time off and then sort of figure things out from there. This was risky,
especially in our current economic climate. Luckily, I've never been shy about
making such decisions. After all, I love a good adventure, and adventures
always entail a certain amount of risk.

During my vacation, I spent a lot of time playing piano and writing music. It
felt good to give my creative muscles some much-needed exercise. I assessed my
career and my goals. I read a lot. I played some video games. I quickly found,
however, that living without a "<a
  href="http://37signals.com/svn/posts/1930-mojito-island-is-a-mirage">dedicated
  purpose</a>" was less than satisfying. I was not happy leaving my tools in
the corner to gather dust: they needed to be used. So, how best to use them?

I decided, after some consideration, that what I wanted was the opportunity to
shape the destiny of a project that I believed in. I wanted to do more than sit
behind a desk and code. Luckily, I was presented with just such an opportunity
only a few weeks after leaving Hashrocket. Rick Bradley, a good friend of mine
and an excellent developer, had a client who was looking for a full-time hire.
I was reluctant to become Yet Another Developer but I decided to look into it.
I'm sure glad I did: the position turned out to be just what I was looking for.

The client was <a href="http://reductivelabs.com/">Reductive Labs</a>, the
company behind <a href="http://reductivelabs.com/trac/puppet/" title="puppet -
  Trac">Puppet</a>, the Ruby-based configuration management tool. This in and
of itself was interesting. The Puppet codebase covers a large area both
topographically and conceptually. It has a significant installation base and a
large open source community. It would be a challenging project to work on and a
welcome test of my abilities.

I don't have a Computer Science background. I've never taken any courses in
programming. I am entirely self-taught. Puppet, on the other hand, has a lot of
Serious Business going on: a parser-compiler, a graphing library, client-server
systems, and so on. I have experience in some of these areas, but in others I
have only a basic theoretical knowledge gleaned by way of an intense curiosity
and a love of reading. I had read the <a
  href="http://dragonbook.stanford.edu/">Dragon Book</a>, for instance, but I
had no experiential background in language design or writing parsers and
compilers. Luckily, my lack of a formal education was not a barrier to entry
(nor should it be if you have the skills needed to execute or the ability to
acquire them, but that's a topic for another post).

I spent a week in Portland getting to know the code and the company. While
Puppet is older than Rails, the code has until recently been under the sole
stewardship of Reductive founder and CEO Luke Kanies. As a company, Reductive
is small and young, but the technology is relatively mature. This is an
interesting combination of both the pioneering spirit of a startup and the
stability of an established open source project.

During the day, I spent my time pairing with Luke and talking with the founders
about their plans for Reductive Labs and Puppet. Luke has a piercing
intelligence and a compelling vision for the future of both Puppet and
Reductive Labs itself. I quickly saw that I would not just be yet another a
developer, rather that I would also have the opportunity to lead teams,
collaborate with a large and active open source community, and even more
importantly, to help Luke and the rest of the Reductive team make design and
strategy decisions that would inform the growth of both Puppet and the company.
Plus, I would be "forced" to relocate to Portland, one of my favorite cities.
Bonus.

Apparently my visit was a success: I'm pleased to say that Luke offered me a
position immediately after my trip and I accepted just as quickly. As I grow
into my new responsibilities at Reductive, I find that they scale well with my
abilities. Luke seems happy to let me do what I'm good at and I enjoy the
opportunity to carve out my own role within a growing company. Most
importantly, I feel like I have the opportunity to accomplish something
significant. Nothing matters more to my sense of fulfillment and satisfaction.

My faithful readers have most likely been lamenting this blog's recent lack of
content. Hopefully my little story helps explain this conspicuous absence.
Expect more posts in the near future. I've got plenty to talk about.
